Uh, to the Environment Select Committee this afternoon,
Dame Patsy, and Joe, um, to the annual review
of the Climate Change Commission.
Uh, we have a couple of hours with you, so, uh,
members have many, many questions.
I understand. So, um, it's best a few perhaps start
with some introductions and opening remarks,
and then, uh, we'll open it up to the floor for questions.
Oh, thank you, Madam Chair and Koto.
Really delighted to be here to see you
and, uh, have a some time to discuss our important work.
The Climate Change Commission continues
to deliver independence,
evidence-based advice in a rapidly changing global and
and domestic context.
Our work supports effective climate policy,
which is essential for economic growth, resilience,
and credibility on a global stage.
When I was approached about this role last year,
the commission's, independence
and evidence-based mandate really appealed to me.
It's my opinion that climate change is above politics
and needs long-term planning to be addressed effectively.
I began in the role in February of this year,
and that was during a period of significant change
for the commission, following on from a major funding
reduction and organizational restructure.
And since starting, I've worked with the commissioners
and the staff to ensure continu continuity
of our statutory advice and to maintain independence
and quality throughout this period of change.
The commission has delivered more than ever before,
and we remain committed to transparency, engagement,
and excellence in our evidence-based reporting.
I also think that deliberate climate action is a form
of risk management, a partic a potential driver
of innovation and can be used as a catalyst
for smarter investment and adaptation.
All of these are opportunities to help New Zealand's economy
thrive and prosper.
I do believe we have reason to be optimistic.
Emissions are reducing, innovation is accelerating,
and all of these are opportunities to help our economy.
Uh, and we know our, our global markets,
particularly our export markets, reward climate leadership.
But urgency remains every ton matters. Every year matters.
Every 10th of a degree matters.
To paraphrase Kate Shepherd,
do not think your individual actions do not matter much.
The rain that refreshes the parched ground is made
up of single drops.
That's all I I'd like to start with,
so thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you. And did you want
to make any further remarks at all, Joe,
before we open up for questions?
Oh, really happy to just go straight to questions. Thanks.
Okay. Brilliant. Well, we have our very first
question from Deborah Russell.
Oh, um, thank you.
Thank you Dave Patsy,
and thank you, um, Joe, nice to see you both again.
Um, I am increasingly concerned about the lack
of focus on climate from this government.
Um, and in particular,
something came out last week was quite disturbing, um,
the parliamentary commissioners for the environment, sort
of annual collating of
where environment expenditure comes from across government
and where it goes to, and in showing, in terms of
where it goes to for climate.
In 20 22, 23,
we spent 800 million across all of government on climate.
In 2324, we spent, um,
1.08 billion in 20 24, 25, 1 0.2 billion.
Um, and in 20 25, 26 we're down to 657 million.
So a drop of 46% between last year. And this.
Now, obviously some of that is in the Climate Commission,
but some of it is obviously elsewhere across government too.
But there's been a substantial reduction in spending on
climate across this government.
Mm-hmm. Um, how is that affecting your work
and, um, obviously the work of the commission,
but also what do you think it says about the focus
of this government on climate or not?
Well, I'm not sure that second part is within
our, as you know, I
Was gonna try. I'm
just gonna try. But how is it impacting your work?
But I think, uh, I think in my opening remarks,
I did make the point that there has been a substantial
restructure in the commission,
and that has been, um, um,
necessitated by a significant reduction in our,
um, in our budget.
Yeah. Um, I think it dropped from 18.4 million to, um,
the current year of 14.3, which
for a small organization is a, is, um,
is quite a substantial reduction, uh, involved.
Our, our, our budget is essentially, uh,
people, that's what we spend our money on really, you know,
apart from the usual, uh, renting and so forth, it's people.
And so we had to reduce our, um, staff by 30%, uh,
which is substantial.
But I think, and I'm going to turn over
to Jonah has probably getting nervous
about what I'm gonna say next.
I only started in February,
and I've really worked with this new structure,
but I have to say that, um, as well,
perhaps this is a little bit outside what you'd expect.
I was very impressed with the way that Joe and her team,
and I have to congratulate my predecessor as well, manage
that substantial restructure without, um, you know,
any significant, uh, discontent in the staff or,
or, uh, or concerns.
And we do have a pretty streamlined
different way of working now.
So we've had to change the ways of working,
but we are not that resilient.
I don't think we could do it again, Joe.
Thank you, Patsy. Um, yeah, as Patsy said, uh, we, um,
redu, uh, we restructured last year.
Um, we also, uh, took the opportunity
to streamline our systems
and process processes, which was, um, reflected the, uh,
the fact that we'd reached maturity as an organization.
So there was an opportunity to do that.
Um, we are now at the a point
where we are on a lean baseline, so e um, any further,
um, uh, um,
where our resilience is constrained now, essentially.
Um, so the key issue that we need
to manage going forward is retaining the core capability to,
um, undertake the statutory work that we do.
So, um, you know, I appreciate
what you're saying about the commission itself.
Mm-hmm. Um, and I note that, you know, that the 4 million
or so reduction in your baseline,
that doesn't quite go near the, the 650 million
or so that's reduced across government.
And I guess, um, my concern is
that the commission has a role in advocacy and in education
and in, uh, keeping us aware of climate hazards.
And it does all those things as best it can,
but it seems to be falling on deaf ears given the
reduction across government.
So you've got quite a task in front
of you in terms of trying to do that.
So, you know, how are you going to do that given?
Yeah, so I, um, our, our role commission is really
to create that independent evidence base for the government
to then, um, make decisions
and also to monitor government's progress.
Um, so that, uh, you know, public, um, has, uh, insight into
how we're going towards our target.
And so that's what we're, um, continue to focus on.
Um, there is more broadly, we assessed, um,
the government's progress in our annual
monitoring report last year.
We will do that again next year.
Those reports are snapshots in time that build up a picture
of how we are tracking.
So essentially we, we provide that evidence base
and the government then, um, makes the, the decisions about,
um, what happens on the ground.
Yep. Yep. I appreciate that you are all, you know,
working quite hard on this.
But, um, the other thing is that, you know, um,
that Climate Commission is quite driven by the, um, CCRA,
that's your enabling legislation.
That's what lets you do your work.
And of course, the CCRA has sitting within it,
our 1.5 degrees Yes.
Commitment. Yeah.
Um, and a again, given that you have to drive towards this,
given what's happening across government is
that making your task more difficult.
So ultimately what happens across government is
with the government of the day, um, to, to decide on,
so our role comes back to creating
that evidence base in line with the CCRA.
Mm-hmm. Um, so that, that's essentially what we,
we continue to focus on.
Um, and we give insight into that every year.
Um, and so this year's progress report, of course, we came
and briefed you about, and we will, um,
we'll be drawing attention to
how we are going next year as well.
Um, is we are also working on, um, our statutory, um,
requirements for the coming year
that includes the National Climate Change Risk Assessment,
our next annual ETS advice, our, um,
national adaptation plan, progress report.
So all of those are still in train, um, where we will assess
how the, um, how the country's tracking and,
and essentially, um, draw out implications of different, um,
scenarios and choices that the government has. Mm-hmm.
Thank you. Thank you.
And I just, just with that,
obviously you talked about the restructure reduced staff,
um, and obviously the reduced cost, uh,
but you are still reaching your outputs
and, uh, delivering, uh, what you need to.
Um, but just in a more streamlined
way, is that, is that correct?
So we're, we're confident that we are on track
for this financial,
this coming financial year based on our current
appropriation provided there are no unplanned shocks
or further reductions.
Mm-hmm. Um, because we are at that key issue
around retaining that core capability in house
to be able to produce that advice.
So that's sort of where it currently stands.
Brilliant. Thank you. Chloe.
I wanna ask about targets.
Um, when did the government notify the climate change
Commission of its decision on climate targets
and its response to your advice?
So in terms of, um, response up
to our advice mm-hmm.
Um, we have received an embargoed official report. Mm-hmm.
I think, um, but that is still under embargo. So, um, when
Did you receive that?
Oh, I would have to, um, get you the exact Yeah.
Date was emailed. Could
We get that exact date following this hearing?
Uh, I assume so. I much Okay.
Um, I mean, do you recall if it was
after October the 12th? Yeah.
Uh, yes. So that, yes, it was,
it was like a week or so ago. Yeah.
Okay. That, that's useful to know. 'cause you'll
Be aware, unless it didn't get
to me, I think it was addressed to. Yeah.
But I mean, you are probably aware of the fact
that on an obscure ministry for the environment webpage,
there was publication of the government's response
to your advice, which was only discovered by journalist
who were digging into whether this advice had gone public
or whether the government's response had gone
public. Are you aware of that?
Yeah. So we, yeah. Yeah, we are. Okay.
Yeah. That's ultimately for the minister.
Yep. Yeah. Okay. Uh, and just,
Just on that though, would you like
to clarify those dates at all?
Come back with a specific,
Can come with the specific dates, um, if that's helpful.
Okay. Of when we got the embargoed copy. Yeah, yeah, yeah.
So that we can get some clarification around that.
Um, other than accusations,
Oh, I mean, more than anything, it's just
that the government was required to respond by, I believe,
the 21st of November.
And there wasn't any publicly notified response through,
for example, a beehive press release.
It had to be discovered by journal sticking
through the ministry for the environments web page.
Um, and I just guess just on that embargoed response,
that does include the government's reasons
for its rejection of your advice.
I can't give you it's embargo. Okay.
Um, I mean, to that point,
you obviously recommended strengthening both of our targets.
The government has done the opposite on both
of those recommendations.
And back in your advice at the end of last year, you said
that you said, and I quote, if applying the principle
of no additional warming resulted in a less ambitious target
for biogenic methane reductions in the current target, which
of course is what has happened mm-hmm.
New Zealand would face choices.
It would have to one, set a new target that allows
for more warming than the current 2050 target
or two, try to maintain the expected warming impacts
of the current target and require faster
and further reductions of other greenhouse gases.
In layman's terms, effectively, that means
that we have a choice between either
allowing more global warming
or strengthening our other targets.
What has the government done?
So, so again, the, the final official report is, um, uh,
with us as an embargo.
I think the minister has said publicly, um, uh, you know,
a high level in response around that target,
so I can explain our advice more.
Mm-hmm. But I can't really speak
for the minister here, sorry.
Yeah. But I guess Okay,
then maybe if you can unpack your advice there.
Yeah, yeah. Given that the government did undertake
that no additional warming approach
and hasn't strengthened the other target, for all intents
and purposes, that means that government policy is now such
that we are allowing more global warming to occur than
otherwise would've happened.
Yes. Yes. So we ma we are absolutely making clear the
consequences of different choices and implications of that.
Perhaps it would be useful to clarify, uh, your advice
around that and your positioning.
As you said, you can't speak for minister and government,
but you can speak for the Climate
Change Commission. Perhaps
If I could ask you to unpack a specific thread of that.
Okay. Yeah. So my understanding of your advice is
that you have said that
to reject a net negative 20 megaton target
for gases other than biogenic methane locked in a target
that you said, and I quote, is entirely inadequate.
Could you explain what you mean by that?
So more broadly, um, I think the, the broader context
for our target review is probably useful here for,
you know, decision makers.
Um, we had very specific terms reference
that are set under the ACT when we come to target review.
And part of that is assessing
what has changed since the act was passed, um, in 2019.
Mm-hmm. And so that's exactly what we did.
Um, and we looked at
what has changed in the, in the science.
Uh, what we found was that the impacts are worse than
what was, um, previously understood, you know,
that we were facing from a changing climate.
We also found that the technologies, um, had, uh,
become cheaper faster.
Mm-hmm. And so that's what led to our recommendation there.
We also consulted publicly a number
of people raised the no additional warming, um,
uh, point with us.
And so then we unpacked it in our advice about
what the consequences of a no additional, uh,
warming target mm-hmm.
Um, would be. And that's
what you are quoting from suggestion. Yeah.
Um, so for, yeah. Carry on. Yeah.
Further to that point, when you were giving your advice
around strengthening both of those targets,
you made the point that it was entirely compatible
with the notion of growth, uh,
and more than that, that it could actually improve cost
of living for New Zealanders, notably
through investment in our electricity sector.
Uh, so you're saying it's feasible and affordable
and more aligned with our global contribution
as in New Zealand.
So I guess the counterfactual to that is not moving in line
with what is more affordable and fair, et cetera, et cetera.
So I guess, could you step through
what the fiscal implications are of the government choosing
to reject your advice?
Or if you wanna speak more openly about if your advice were
not followed the cost of living
implications for New Zealanders? Yeah,
Sure. And I think
a key consideration, um, for in target setting,
um, is thinking around the pace of change.
You know, how quickly can we get somewhere
and what do we benefit from it?
And so that's a lot of what our advice focuses on.
Um, we have, um, found through this piece of advice,
but also in other work we've done around emissions budgets
that a well signaled, well-paced transition
to a lower emissions, um, economy, um, has a, a lot
of economic, uh, benefits to us.
Um, we avoid abrupt changes, um,
or passing risks on to future generations.
And We've Just got a couple
of supplementaries on targets,
unless you want carry on.
Yeah. I mean, I guess just then to be explicit about it, uh,
with us or with the rejection of that advice
or with that advice, however you wanna frame it in a way
that feels the most diplomatic given you are the independent
expert Climate Change Commission, I guess, are we
to take from that, that not following your advice can result
in a higher cost of living for New Zealanders
and those greater costs with regard to transition otherwise?
Um, well, we are playing out the scenario, you know,
different scenarios and we, um, show the implications
of those scenarios.
We are just giving advice. The ultimate cost will depend on
the responses that government take.
There are, um, we are in a situation where, um, renewable,
um, electricity generation costs have rapidly declined
and so have, um, battery costs.
So we have got, um, the opportunity to move to a, um,
low cost, reliable electricity system, um, you know,
within the next decade or so.
Mm-hmm. Um, and, uh, that is, um, that then flows on
to lower costs for households and for businesses.
And we recognize there are different choices
that governments can make.
Um, you know, we're, we are reporting on the evidence
that we find mm-hmm.
And we are providing, uh, advice on options,
but those options are for the government to take, so mm-hmm.
You know, that's the consequence.
And you Zealand as well, thank you, that
We'll just take a supplementary on the target from
Yeah. A couple of supplementaries please.
First of all,
particular the transition line actually.
So, um, you say you, I've obviously, government's got choice
and it, you've got, it's gotta be a managed mm-hmm.
Transition without sudden changes and so forth. Mm-hmm.
So making something like outta the blue calling an oil
and gas ban, which then has, has an impact on,
without a proper transition plan, uh, would
that have an impact on the cost
of living and the price of power?
Um, I'm, so from a, going back to first principles,
because we haven't, um, you know, uh, we haven't assessed
that as part of our monitoring, uh,
report, what the impact was.
Um, I, uh, um, the more you can signal,
um, the direction of change, um,
over a decent investment in a horizon, the more
that businesses can plan, the communities can plan, um,
for a, um, orderly transition.
And so it would be fair to say, since we have a be, um,
we've got a situation where we've got a huge pile of coal,
so we've still got power with that.
And, and obviously coal is the worst in terms
of creating emissions and many emissions obligations.
Worst obligation is that actually
therefore leading to a situation whereby we are, uh, uh,
going, it signifies a strong
that we did not have a decent transition plan.
I think, um, so when we think about why we might have a
stock pile of coal, or we have any fossil fuels in the
electricity, electricity system, we still have some, um, uh,
major issues to deal with around dry year risk mm-hmm.
And firming, and there are multiple options for
how you might deal with them.
What we have, um, been saying, um,
and we've said it in previous advice, um,
since the commission was established, is make, have a, um,
strategy around how you're gonna do that
and make sure it's well paced and well signaled.
So, um, we can, uh, you know, have
that orderly transition. Mm-hmm.
Certainly business is telling us that they are, um,
very grateful for long term positive signals that are,
And so when you don't get that right, that leads
to higher power prices
and higher cost of living
for the average household. Correct.
For fluctuations, I think it, yeah.
It becomes around the unpredictability.
Sorry, Can I just, thank you.
We have got another supplementary though from Rachel,
and then I'll come to you, Chloe probably related
It's specifically about coal and
Well, I think the, okay.
If you, if you know Chloe, take
the supplementary on the coal.
Yeah. I mean, I guess if you can just unpack
for the committee, 'cause I think that there is quite a lot,
unfortunately, of missing
and disinformation about, uh, the fact that the majority
of the coal that we, for example, um,
get outta the ground here is actually shipped offshore.
Uh, and the long term
Impacts Didn't say where it's from and a long-term
impacts of the oil and gas span.
If you could just be clear with us about, I guess,
the advice that you have given mm-hmm.
With regard to the investment, for example,
that the government can make in renewable
electricity in order to get towards,
It's still a transition, which you never planned
For. Okay. Well, let's just
open it up to,
if we wanna talk about planning commission
two respond to that.
So if you could respond to the question there,
what is the exact question going?
Well, the question is effectively about the kinds
of planning that we can be doing in our economy.
Right. Uh, and do you guys do a lot of economic modeling
and the kind of trade off,
I guess maybe this is the question.
Uh, what is the trade off of a dollar invested in,
for example, subsidizing new fossil fuel
production versus, and
Yeah. Well, I mean,
ultimately we are clear, um, that we have
to transition away from fossil fossil fuels.
Mm-hmm. Um, and what we have, um, uh,
advised on is when, uh,
plants re plant reach reaches its end of life, that's the,
uh, point to make the decision to, um, uh, um, uh,
transition to a lower emissions alternative.
Mm. Um, there we have to deal with those issues
around firming and dry year.
There's a lot of technology available now, there's a lot
of opportunity, um,
but it's about doing that in a sensible way. Mm-hmm.
But, and I think that the question more, uh, was
around the transition period mm-hmm.
And giving the signals if suddenly there's a big policy
announcement or legislative change that, uh, you know,
businesses and, uh, our economy needs to know
so it can be managed.
And, and that is the reason for, um,
the whole Climate Change Response Act.
We give that advice from 10 to 15 year horizon.
So that's why the emissions budgets go out out that far.
Mm-hmm. So that we can be planning for those now, um,
and have, um, uh, clear signals, um, for the kinds
of investments that are going over those
horizons or even longer.
Is it a positive signal to be for the government to signal
that it will be co-investing in new fossil fuel production?
I think that the, the signals were in the transitional
period and obviously the impact that
that could potentially have on it's a ability
To use gas or coal living,
Which is what we were discussing.
Rachel has a, a supplementary the target, how it works.
Smart. Did a great,
we'll just, we'll just get back on track.
Uh, so we we're on target and
Yes. So thank,
thank you both of you coming in.
Uh, Joe, you were talking about the, um, economic benefits
to one of, um, Chloe's primary question generally.
And then in another supplementary,
you started talking about the reduction in battery costs
and reduction in electricity costs.
And you've just now, um,
brought into the conversation firming and dry air costs.
Mm-hmm. I was wondering when you say
economic benefits mm-hmm.
Of reducing emissions mm-hmm.
Are you, um, confining that to energy costs or is it wider?
Um, so, uh, it's definitely wider.
Um, so we, um, uh, so, uh,
wind solar obviously, um, you know,
free the operating costs, um, in terms of operating,
you've got an upfront investment you have to pay.
But overall, um, you know, that's the cheapest form of, um,
electricity generation we've ever had.
Um, and, uh, moving more of our industry,
electrifying our industry, um, has that, um, potential
to make significant savings over the long term. We
See some Significant health benefits.
That's the other side. Yes. Yes. So, change
To lower emissions cleaner.
Can you give some examples?
Yeah. So, um, our modeling showed, um, most recently that
by 2035, um, we could be, um, avoiding
around 1.5 billion in, um, health, um, costs as a result
of re respiratory related illness, um,
from particulate matter.
Thank you. And, uh, grant McCullum has the first
Yeah. Just wanna go back to the, um,
discussion around the, uh,
uh, the methane targets that was raised earlier.
Do you, when you look, uh, look at the advice
and what New Zealand's contribution to the global emissions,
um, uh, uh, processes,
do you consider emissions leakage
in the process? Any advice
Emissions? Um,
so yes, so emissions leakage, um,
and the impact on New Zealand businesses mm-hmm.
Is a key consideration, um, of all of our work.
Yeah. Can you give us some examples of that, please?
Free allocation, You can write Yeah,
you can pay for it if you want.
Yeah. Well, so yes, industrial allocation is a, um,
tool that's in place to manage that.
It is counterproductive. Mm-hmm.
Of course, if we, um, transition, we meet our targets here,
but that is simply, um,
because we have sent our businesses offshore and thus, um,
and then we get a rises emissions
Overall, that would particularly apply
for the agricultural sector in particular,
Pre-production.
It would, yeah, it would apply across
Agricultural sector, um, energy sector, uh, manufacturing.
Thank you. And a supplementary from David Seymour.
Oh, that's actually a new question.
Look, I I,
Can I just comment on this?
'cause obviously any member of Parliament is entitled
to come to any select committee.
It's very unusual to have the Deputy Prime Minister asking
questions on an annual review hearing. Well,
Very, very proud that member
of the legislative government.
Um, I think that, uh, he is absolutely obliged to be able
to ask a question, um, on scrutiny.
So salary, you, uh,
Point, point of order, we get, it's very unusual
for a member of the executive to be asking questions
for something that relates to their portfolios.
And we had this discussion earlier in another session
On their coalition agreement when
We had, um, a different member of the executive,
but her portfolios are nowhere near as wide ranging
as the Deputy Prime ministers,
which include Associate Associate Finance,
which I think would be highly relevant to climate change.
And I'm interested if it is or isn't. What,
What, well, I mean, if you're interested in, um,
which delegations I have in finance that are
remotely relevant, um, I can't think of any,
Sorry. Well, I think
we have, uh,
obviously representation from every
party, um, at the committee.
And we're not
Here as party members, we're here as members of
Parliament. That's right. We're here
as members of Parliament
Of examining the executive
and the Deputy Prime Minister as part of the executive.
It's
Just Using up your time.
I, I frequently ask questions. Ask
No problem.
We, he is, uh, is a act, uh, party member
of Parliament representation on the Committee point.
Ethan can ask a question to the Climate Change Commission.
So, um, I am ignores
Their answers Anyway, if you would
like to ask a question. Um,
Well, we Just, we're just gonna take this to
business commitment because it is highly,
particularly the rules,
but it is so against the spirit
of things, you know, it really
Is. Yeah. But I mean, at the
end of the day,
we're all represented here, uh, by all of our parties Act,
act as entitled to have a member of their parliament, member
of Parliament Committee point of honor. Um, yes, Melissa
Madam Chair, he is here as a member of Parliament,
regardless of whether he's actually an the executive.
He is a member of Parliament first and for, uh, foremost.
Absolutely. And he, he did actually give assurances to the,
uh, committee that his portfolio responsibility is actually
far removed from, um, um, I
Mean, sorry, just for that point.
The coalition agreement between the ACT national parties
outlines the pathway to get to no additional warming,
which has downgraded our climate ambition.
So I'd just make that point.
But anyway, let's get on with it.
We can, we, we can, uh, take this into private session.
Let's go if members of the opposition, like,
and we can, uh, look at the technicalities, mate.
Let's go the, the situation here.
If you'd like to use up your time, uh, doing that more.
Otherwise we can allow
and enable, uh, the member of Parliament, uh, David Seymour,
to ask a question to the Climate Change Commission.
Very happy to, if members on the other side are now
content, I, I just No,
We're not, but we're just having To
deal with it. Answer.
Okay. Let's, let's just get on
and, um, we'll, we'll, we'll take the question. Bloody
Hell. Um, look,
it's, first of all, nice to see you guys.
I just wondered, um, if, if, and this is just a comment,
and it's meant as a, of criticism, um,
I wondered about the attention that the commission pay pays
to the use of pronouns, um,
because I've seen an enormous, um, overuse of, uh, we,
um, the, uh, this first person, uh, collective that,
um, you know, at one point you said,
we have an enormous stockpile of coal,
but surely can't apply, um,
to the Climate Change Commission.
And then at another time, just recently, you said, um,
you know, if we are to transition,
and I just feel that we you to explain
the things you're trying to get across by differentiating,
you know, the power companies, the consumer, the government,
the commission, then I think all
of us could have a much better understanding of, of
what we're trying to get to here.
Um, so I hope you take it in the spirit and tend it, um,
because I, I personally have, have struggled at times
to explain what exactly it is that,
or sorry to follow exactly who you are referring to
and who's doing what to whom.
Yeah. Yeah. Did you want
to make any further remarks at all?
Well, I will try very hard to be clear of, um, who is what
Pronouns, mate. If I, if
I may, if I may, is that
On the big top? Yes,
Zoe, you can, um,
you can ask your primary question. Well, I
Mean, I think stop off that is, does that mean
that the Climate Change Commission is now empowered
by virtue of the Deputy Prime Minister's question this then
to critique the government.
So, look, I think that,
why don't you go with your primary question.
No, I, I'm, I'm just, I'm just trying to
Helpful, sorry.
Back in the room. Okay.
So the government, um, seems really confident,
and this is reflected in both, uh, rhetoric
that we're hearing from the climate change, uh, minister,
but also from the Prime Minister.
The government is sounding incredibly confident
that they'll meet the emissions budgets that they have said,
but your advice shows differently.
Can you talk us through simply the differences
and the discrepancies and the modeling
and the variables that the government is inputing into their
modeling versus what you guys are
Yeah, so we do those snapshots.
Mm-hmm. The commission does those snapshot, um,
assessments every, um, year mm-hmm.
At a point in time mm-hmm.
When the commission does those snapshots, um,
we take into account, uh, government policy
as per April mm-hmm.
The year prior, since the commission's report has come out,
the government has, uh,
put forward updated projections mm-hmm.
Which the commission will assess, um,
in next year's, uh, annual monitoring report. Mm-hmm.
So, I guess by any other words, it's correct to say
that the government's current modeling on emissions
reduction take into account policies
that the government has cut or that no longer exist.
So the, so the government's current modeling mm-hmm.
Is what we will scrutinize in next year's round of advice.
I don't wanna speculate on
that in detail ahead of that advice.
Mm-hmm. Uh, you know, to make sure
that we are doing our proper
Yes. You can have a sub off
that. Thank you.
Can, so can I just check the implication of that?
Does that mean that the advice that was, um,
published in July this year, the second, um, uh,
monitoring report mm-hmm.
Was taken from, uh, government modeling from April
of the previous year or the year this year.
So we take, um, into account all policies
as at April, sorry,
the commission takes into account all policies
as at April the same year that we are monitoring.
So April 24th, so April 12th. Right.
So that's the cutoff date of Yes.
I guess modeling the changes in policies and,
And considering, um, all the policy, um, options
that are on the table at that point.
But it is the year, And we take the projections, um,
uh, prior to that as well.
So not all of the policies
that are put on the table at April, um, 20, you know,
of any given year have necessarily been modeled.
They're updated through the government's projections
process as well.
So, can I check the implication?
Mm-hmm. Yes. Abmi true.
So would that mean that, um, because the,
because the commissions, um, looked at, uh, policies
that were up to April mm-hmm.
And the government's emissions reduction plan came out
in, I think December mm-hmm.
November last year. Mm-hmm. Does that mean
that the Climate Change Commissions, uh, predictions
and modeling is more up to date in terms
of the policies included compared to the ones
that the governments released in their projections, um,
which would've been in December the previous
year of the emissions reduction. So
That, uh, so the government has released projections, um,
since our advice came out.
Yes. Mm-hmm. Uh, our assessment took into account the
government's modeling from the, um,
emissions reduction plan two.
Mm-hmm. And so that is in our, our assessment of progress.
We don't do any modeling in our assessment of progress,
we assess what is on the table from the government.
Mm-hmm. Our modeling comes in a different stream
of our work related to the emissions budgets.
Sorry, just to really clarify on that point. Yes.
Another supplementary on that. Yes. Yeah.
Just, just specifically on the modeling
that the government undertakes.
Mm-hmm. So just to be crystal clear, that modeling can
or could include discontinued policies
and the impacts of those in terms of emissions reductions.
Well, we haven't done the assessment to be able
to determine that one way or another.
Okay. Thank you. Look, we'll now move to Debra Russell
for another line
Of questions. Thank
you. Um, I want to dig into, um,
the implications of your reported deficit this year
and where it arose from,
and some of the policy stuff around this.
So, the reported deficit arises from a couple of things.
One is from some RWTN, which is neither handled their money
and money out the IWT stuff.
Oh, yes, yes, yes. Yeah, it's very straightforward.
But the other part of the deficit, um, really arises
because of a, a 2.3 million in, um,
return of capital for the crown.
I, I tried to tease this out with the mm-hmm.
Um, tease this out in my mind
because I used to be an accountant.
Right. So, you know, so you had some money sitting there,
um, and the original,
have you got your CFO here by any chance? No,
But I had, Sorry.
Um, so I'm, I've,
so you'd have gone debit cash credit would've been capital
in this case, and then, um, presumably it was had
to be spent over time,
and you would've done something like debit the capital,
credit revenue, debit expense,
that things would've gone in and out.
It just seemed to me that in terms of that, um, the way
that it was accounted for,
it should have just been a straightforward return
of capital, not a deduction from revenue.
That's what we thought. Yes. Right.
So why then did you record it
as a reduction in revenue rather than a return of capital?
So we had budgeted for a return of capital. Yes.
Um, but it was recorded, um, by treasury
as a reduction in our, um, appropriation. Right.
And So therefore we had to make the adjustment. Um,
So treasury changed the appropriation on you?
Yes. Who instructed Treasury
to change the appropriation on you? Do you know, you'd
Have to ask treasury.
I'll see them tomorrow and ask them, um,
because it, it's got me quite worried, um,
because that seemed, seemed like a very odd way
of recording the transaction To me.
What's got me really worried about is, is it seems to relate
to the methane target now, um,
and, um, in fact, the money was there
for pricing agricultural emissions.
Mm-hmm. And then we saw, I can't recall where exactly,
um, I saw it in your report,
but in actual fact, your responsibility
for pricing agricultural emissions was removed from you.
Where did that responsibility go?
So, um, so that money was given, um, in anticipation of
that function, um, when you received that, that function.
And, um,
So, you know, you, you, you, you lost the,
we didn't have the function,
but we were anticipating getting it,
but obviously the government at some stage anticipated
having you have you having it
because they'd allocated money for it.
Mm-hmm. So, so there was a decision made somewhere to take,
thinking about me saying out of your hands.
I, well, yeah. So, yeah, you know,
our role follows the legislation
that we have at, um, at hand.
It's up to Parliament to decide whether they want to change
that legislation.
Um, and, uh, we will continue to operate, uh, given
what we, uh, what's within the legislation.
Yeah. So I've got, um, uh, you know, funding,
well, you're gonna have funding previously appropriate
to the commission to support a possible function advising on
agricultural emissions.
Pricing would be returned to the center while further
policy work was undertaken.
Mm-hmm. Okay.
So it was taken out of your hands, even though you are kind
of the experts in this space.
And then we had an alternative, um,
report on methane developed by a different set of people.
Do you know if the funding was, if that's
where the funding went, or you not quite sure.
Yeah, that's, that would be something for the minister.
Yep. Okay. So what's got me, um, worried here too is that,
um, part
of your role is you actually have a role in which you, um,
if I look at it, um, you know, around the CCRA,
it enables you and in fact, what the whole lot
of the advice you are giving
and the way you're structured is around
that 1.5 degrees mm-hmm.
Which is the, the Paris goal. Mm-hmm.
Um, and we've now had this, um,
no additional warming nonsense.
Um, sorry, there no additional warming alternative science.
How's that affected? Excuse me. Excuse
Me. Point of
Order. Okay. Yeah. Point of
Point of order. Um, of order.
I just don't think that's appropriate
to describe the people on that, on that put on
that panelist being, creating alternative science.
Oh, no, that greats. Thank
You. I think that's a fair enough
call. Do you wanna just
Rephrase if I'd like to just say they're great scientists
and they exam answered exactly the question, which was set
for them, which was, if we want
to achieve no additional warming Yep.
Then how do we do it? So the question they answered,
they did with excellent work.
Excellent. The question was point, point of what we taken.
Do you wanna just kind of rephrase,
Uh, your commentary there?
So we had an alternative view presented, um,
and that obviously is around no additional warming.
Where does that leave us in terms of on being on track
to meet our targets?
Uh, so just to unpack that a little bit, um, there, that,
that panel was asked a different question to what, um,
we did in our target review.
So we were doing our five yearly, um,
kick the tires on the target under the act based on those,
um, criteria that are set out within their,
ultimately it is the government's, um, role
to then determine what that final target is.
They don't have to take, take our advice, they have
to explain why they don't take our advice.
Um, and, uh, we, um,
and if the government of the day changes the target, then,
um, our work will then, um, uh, be
relevant to the new target that's set
within the legislation.
One of the things that we've been hearing from some
of the experts in this space is that if we don't achieve our
1.5 goal through, um, agricultural pricing as well
as other pricing, or through reducing methane as well
as other, um, measures, is that it just means that the rest
of the economy is going to work harder to achieve our goal.
Um, so are you, um, now starting to revise your, um,
advice in the light of that?
Oh no. We are still staying behind our advice. Right.
Um, what it means is our future work will be, um, uh,
about, um, providing the commission's advice towards
whatever the 2050 target is within the
legislation at that time. So, right.
So when's your next advice to
On the target?
Yeah. Or, or more generally
On the, on how to meet the target.
Yeah. So under the current legislation, um, we are, um,
uh, required to do a target review every five years.
Yeah. Um, there are some, you know,
the government has proposed changes to the legislation,
which would alter the timeframe, I believe.
Yeah. Around the target review. Did
The government consult you on those changes?
On the proposed changes? Yeah.
Um, we have, um, the commission have, um,
was asked to, um, give a view on what changes could be, um,
made to make the Climate Change Response Act,
um, work better.
We did that, we sent a letter at the end of last year.
Mm-hmm. Um, and then since then we've been, um,
engaging at a working level, um, testing, uh,
practicalities, but we haven't given further advice.
Right. Okay. So no particular further advice.
So if the government, um,
as Signal does change the Climate Change Response Act, the,
it was signal that it's gonna change the methane target in
there from, um, 14, sorry, from 24 to 47%
to 14 to 24%.
Mm-hmm. Um, so at that stage you'll work to that
because that's what you're required to work to.
So, um, if I could just split out,
there's a couple of pieces going on here.
There's a few changes to the legislation mm-hmm.
The government's put on the table.
So one part of it is around that target, um, change.
Um, and that is where we have given, um, uh,
the commission gave advice on the
target at the end of last year.
Um, that advice still stands and it's relevant, um,
but it is up to the government
to make its final determination there as the system set up.
The other changes on the table are the efficiency review
of the Climate Change Response Act.
Now that is where, um, the commission was asked
to give a view on how the, um,
ACT could work more in a more efficient way,
given it was five years since the
legislation was, um, set up.
Um, and that's what, and that's, um, available.
That letter, um, is available on our website. Right. Okay.
Thank you. Look, grant McCallum's
got a couple of stuff on the
Tree. Yeah. Just on the, um,
on the methane targets, again, since,
excuse me, conversation, um,
what if like under the, the act currently under the act,
the, the, the targets here, 24 to 47.
If those were implemented without alternative technologies,
what would be the impact on the rural sector and the,
and also then on the Zealand economy?
Oh, did you want to say something else? Okay.
Um, so we have, um, uh, put out,
um, in our emissions budgets advice mm-hmm.
Um, modeled different scenarios for achieving the 24
to 47 based on, um, the pipeline of new technologies,
um, changes in, um, in how, uh, diversification
of land, uh, and changes in PR and practices on farm.
So that's the, um, what we have worked through, um,
which could get us into the 24 to 40%, uh,
47 per percent range is what, um, uh, we found
that it was a feasible and affordable
and technically achievable, um,
in our previous emissions budget advice
at the end of last year.
And, and, and so what,
and if like at the moment,
I guess the technology is developing, yeah.
Okay. I think we can all see that, which is great.
And, but if, if we
a situation whereby you are asking the farming community,
for example, rural sector to reduce their emission, say
by 47%, technology wasn't there, what would that do
to the rural economy and the New Zealand economy?
Yeah, so I believe the, um,
the current range mm-hmm.
The 47% mm-hmm.
Um, is, uh, um, uh,
potentially achieved by new technologies.
Um, my, um, recollection is the 24% is based on currently
available changes in practices and technologies.
Mm-hmm. Um, one
of the key considerations when we do our scenario work
for emissions budgets is impact on rural communities.
So we do, um, factor that in when we think about the rate
of change and the, um, the, um, impact, um,
ultimately how the transition will be felt
by rural communities
and others will depend on,
um, decisions that government make.
We're, um, essentially laying out the scenarios
and implications of d different choices available to you.
And one final sub and,
and the land use, you talk about land use change,
what were you sort of think, talk think what,
what were you thinking about in that space?
What sort of alternatives?
So there is, um, potential around reforestation,
um, uh, regeneration of, um, native bush.
Um, there is some potential around horticulture
and cropping, um,
and particularly around, um,
diversifying farm, uh, farm systems.
Um, and that is also relevant in terms
of thinking about us adapting to a, um,
a changing climate climate as well.
Okay. You thank you.
And then we've got a couple of
supplementary still Deborah Russell.
So I'm just trying to recall, um,
I think I might be wrong on this.
I think I saw you advising somewhere the natural fact
in terms of the reduction in methane flow that's needed
that you would say it now needed to be around about 35%.
I've got that stuck in my mind from somewhere,
but I'm not quite sure.
Can, can you does that?
I believe that's come from our target review advice,
but I might actually invite our chief scientist.
Yeah. Um, who is just looking back there, um, if,
if you'd like hear a bit more around the table.
Absolutely. Yeah. So
This is Dr. Grant Blackwell.
I think he's spoken to you before.
He has, he has. Yep.
Uh, so the, sorry, the question again. Just make sure.
So I'm, I'm just, I'm sorry I'm dredging my memory,
but I seem to recall somewhere stuff I read this year
that once the Climate Commission said, actually,
we probably need to get our meat and reduce flow reduce
by about 35% to remain within.
Uh, so I think within the target review we had a look at
what the, the latest science was saying,
and that would the work from the IPCC looking at the
pathways that would keep us on track
to 1.5 given the last couple of years
and what emissions have been doing.
Right. They were updates that they were,
the pathways had steepened
And that was the worldwide flow on methane
That was, that was worldwide.
Worldwide. Right. So not sure very regional flow
Has a supplementary on that too. Yeah.
It was just, I guess if you could be really specific
with us, I mean, you guys recommended, uh, raising the floor
or tightening the band of the target, uh, for methane.
Um, the government's obviously gone
and done the opposite and halved it.
But just as was, uh, unpacked in that previous question,
you, the Climate Commission believes
that it is entirely affordable
and entirely feasible to raise the floor
for the methane target.
And would the flow on ramifications of that in terms
of your macroeconomic modeling be
that the agricultural sector is for example,
potentially more resilient?
Um, so yes, that's correct.
We found, um, affordable feasible pathways, um, to,
um, a tightened target.
Um, and that's
that laid out in our target review advice. Thank
You. And another summary, would,
Would you, would you ask to, um,
remind us about those affordable feasible pathways please?
Uh, yes. So, um, we have, um, scenario modeling within
the, um, a target review.
We're very happy to, um, either come back
or, um, uh, send you through the scenarios
and the results of those scenarios if you're
Like This group. And would, would
that, some of those scenarios be,
for example, um, planting a lot more
of the hill country New Zealand pine trees,
That's what your ETS chambers require.
Okay. Yeah. Um,
Like to answer, I don't, Ah, yes. Well, um,
Oh, sure. Well,
I can talk a little bit to the,
and the agricultural side rather than the, the, the trees.
So it was things like looking at that range of you,
so emissions efficiency across different
farming systems from farms.
I'm sure as you're aware, there's a big range
from how many Yep.
Emissions per kilogram of product and things.
So looking at being able to support farmers to shift across
that bell curve, if you like. Um, the,
Been trying to do that forever by the way.
Sorry, we've been trying to do that on farms forever.
Yeah. So things like that.
Um, things like, um,
so we know there are methane inhibitors currently available
elsewhere that require animals being fed you in every meal.
So those are fit our systems,
but there's work going on here
to have a bolus or waste to deliver.
So looking so those options like that to, um,
to help make those predictions.
Thank you. And Chloe had another stop on that.
Further to that point around land conversions,
in particular in the government emissions reduction plan
too, and the over reliance on the emissions trading scheme,
could you unpack how much more a forestation,
particularly pine plantation
and of those land conversions is going to be necessary?
So just so,
So I guess just based on the government's e RRP two, yes,
there's going to be a lot of land conversion necessary
from productive farming land as a result
of the over reliance on the emissions trading scheme.
Can you tell us what that means in practical terms? So
What we found from our emission monitoring report this
year is that something like 47% of the, um,
third emissions budget will be, um, uh,
the current government is planning to rely on that, um,
from, uh, plantation forestry and is
Coming from inside the House. So
that was why we, um, drew attention to that
and, um, uh, pointed out that for those forests
to have an i, um, impact in that emissions, uh,
reduction period mm-hmm.
Uh, 2030 to 2035, they would have
to be in the ground within the next couple of years.
Mm-hmm. Otherwise, that would no longer be an option,
because of course it takes time for those, um, trees
to actually grow and start sequestering carbons. Yes,
Of course. Yeah. And,
And so were you, and just remind me again, so
that advice was based on which targets
Your targets?
That's ma based on the emissions budgets.
Budgets, So that the,
The So is that the 24 to 47 totes? No,
I, It's your ERP too.
Hang on. I thought he was
parliament and I was the executive. Oh, yeah.
Just, Just if we just, uh, uh, Joe answer the question.
Yeah, sure. So that was, um,
our monitoring point report looking at emissions budget one,
emissions budget two, and emissions budget three.
So we were monitoring, um, assessing risk as, um,
to achieving those emissions budgets.
So that wasn't our target review. Yeah.
But then again, and then so further to that, if, if
as technology as we've been indicated is starting
to come forward mm-hmm.
Then the reliance on those trees will
drop quite significantly on,
Uh, pote, uh, potentially if,
but, um, we, that was factored in,
in the emissions reduction plan.
What, who my un my understanding is that the pipeline
of technologies, um,
and that they will take time to come on online.
Mm-hmm. So I think really what we,
what we were recommending in the,
in the monitoring report is to take more
of a Swiss army knife approach
and be careful about, um, over reliance on one sector.
Mm-hmm. Um, because of the risks it creates. Mm-hmm.
Yeah. Just a clarification. Yeah. So
The emissions reduction plan
that you're talking about mm-hmm.
Is the one from this government's Correct.
This state of government's. Correct. Thank you.
Mm-hmm. Um, look, we've got a couple of primaries, uh,
from people who haven't asked questions.
Uh, Ryan, uh, you'll go to you.
Thanks, Stuart. Excuse me.
I'll just try and find my thing.
Um, so chair with your indulgences,
I know we're in scrutiny, but this was got brought up
through, um, a couple of the questions around cost
of living renewable energy.
Um, I note that the parliamentary com commissioner, uh,
recently submitted on our fast track amendments bill,
but I don't think, um, the commission did.
And the reason why I ask is
'cause I'll be interested in your view on third party appeal
rights because we had, um, submitters on behalf
of Meridian submitting to, uh, renew, uh, y techy, um,
uh, hydro scheme.
And they'd reached agreements
with y Maddy district council y techy Mackenzie, NZTA Alps
to ocean irrigation companies,
whitewater rafting, fish and game.
And then they had one objection from, um, forest
and Bird, which is now pushed into environment court
and installed this whole thing,
which is a New Zealand owned, uh, renewable energy project.
And so I'd be interested in your views
of why you didn't submit particularly
around third party appeal rights
and how that's actually, um, putting the handbrake on a lot
of these renewable energy projects
and the cost to our economy and cost of living.
Yeah. So we generally don't submit on a project
by project base.
That's not our role. Um, our role is to give that, um,
strategic level advice on the direction po of policy, um,
and where there might be barriers to opportunities
and risks for government choices. Yeah,
No, I appreciate that. Not the
project, but that was all part that what came out
of the fast track amendment process.
And so I was just interested in
your pro your thoughts around that. And,
Um, so I can give you some general thoughts around, um,
the pace of change for renewable
electricity, if that's helpful.
Um, we do there some of the biggest opportunities in terms
of, um, uh, uh, meeting our emissions budgets
and our transition really relate to, uh, renewable
electricity and more broadly, um, the
emissions gains you can get from electrifying the economy.
Um, so that energy picture industry picture more widely.
Um, we do need a, um, a well paced
but, um, you know, uh, a, um, a build out of our renewable,
um, electricity, um, at pace, um, to take advantage
of those opportunities.
Uh, and um, uh, I think that's as about as specific
as, um, we can go without, um, following up
with a more detailed briefing,
Joe. It's fair to say, isn't it?
That that's
what we provide in our reports.
So that's our primary means of communication.
You know, we are not really set up or,
or resourced, we mentioned
before the the lean mean approach we take to our resourcing,
but we do focus on our reports
and of course, making them freely available
and understandable to the general public.
I guess just, and finally, and I'm trying to, I'm trying
to, you have to respond to diplomatically, I'm not trying
to be political, but have you seen in your work the irony
of the, the RMA actually hamstringing projects,
which were actually better
for the environment with the industry actually.
Oh goodness.
And I've got a, Sorry, I didn't quite hear the last bit
of, sorry, but maybe ask that question again, Ryan.
So my, my question was, um, have you seen the irony in
that some of the fast track amendment has actually been
designed to, to fast track
or speed up accelerate, enable a lot
of these renewable energy projects?
Because the irony is some of the opposition
to them is actually and stop the very
thing that they're trying to achieve.
Yeah. Well, I mean, it's not our role to see irony,
but put that, put that aside, um, you know, one
of the things we've consistently talked,
talked about is making sure that we are removing barriers
to, um, electrification and renewable electricity.
Of course, there are other factors
to consider when you are thinking about, um,
particular communities and the ecological circumstances.
Um, so that's why I don't wanna draw, uh, draw,
be drawn into any particular one case,
but overall, we do need to transition at a, at, you know,
a, a fast pace
There. Of course. Thank you. Yeah,
Thank you. Look, we'll
Go to, I do got a supplementary on that colleague.
Yeah. Okay. Yeah. So, um, as I understand it,
in your monitoring and reporting, um, report, uh,
you are finding a $4.2 billion potential
and savings from Electrifying Transport,
but that's not represented in the government's second ERP.
Can you just run us through, I guess, again,
the differences in terms of the variables
that you are modeling versus what they're modeling
and also, I guess further to the point of
what you are modeling what
you've actually taken into account?
Yes. Okay. So I'll try, I'll try
and, um, uh, lay out the ground there and,
and direct me if I'm missing what you need there.
Um, so we, uh, produce scenarios mm-hmm.
For our missions budgets
and out to targets to show that they, um, to find pathways
that are achievable, affordable.
Mm-hmm. Um, and, uh, um,
best meet the criteria within the act.
So that's what we do in our budgets work.
Um, we will update those assumptions from time to time
for our missions trading scheme settings work.
But that's that track in our, uh, monitoring reports.
Um, we're assessing, um, the government's
progress against targets.
Mm-hmm. So we don't do new modeling for that necessarily,
and we are looking at government projections, um, uh,
you know, their, their own assessments of, um,
what things are gonna achieve mm-hmm.
And really kick the tires there. Mm-hmm.
Um, so in terms of
what we've seen in transport, I think that was your Yeah.
Your question. That's one of the,
where there is a, a big opportunity.
Mm-hmm. Um, we have, um, found that, um,
our uptake of electric vehicles, for example,
in New Zealand is a lot slower than
what's happening globally.
Mm-hmm. Um, but at the same time,
battery costs have gone down dramatically.
Mm-hmm. Um, even in this last year.
And so there's a, a, you know,
a big op opportunity there mm-hmm.
Um, to make further progress.
And we highlight the types of, um, policy that might, uh,
target a policy that might, um,
help support faster uptake. Mm-hmm.
Is there any world in which the Climate Change Commission
would, uh, recommend investment in new fossil
fuel exploration production?
No.
Um, go For it. Answer.
Well, I cannot speak
for future climate change commissions mm-hmm.
Or, um, for the board.
Um, but we have not, um, historically recommended that.
And we are very aware that we're, um, looking
to transition away from fossil fuels
to meet our targets. Mm.
Thank you. Look, we'll take a primary question from
Francisco and then, uh, we will take a short break.
Uh, thank you chair. Um, just a question around some
of the, uh, technical amendments that have been, um,
that the government is proposing.
Um, I think the letter that you're referring
to is the letter to the Minister of Climate Change
around the CCRA technical amendments.
Yes. And in that, um, you've recommended all sorts
of things, including the, um, removal of the public aspect
of consultation around the, uh, emissions reduction plan.
But can I just say that in that letter
and nowhere else, uh, since that letter has been sent,
that you've recommended that the Climate Change Commission
loses the powers to provide independent advice on the
emissions reduction plan under section five said H
So, um, yes, in the letter we did, um, uh, talk about,
um, uh, removal of the requirement for public consultation,
but not necessarily the discretion
to do public consultation.
And that was particularly a reflection of, um,
the consultation fatigue, um, that we were finding with,
with stakeholders, um,
when we were consulting in the government was consulting.
So that's that piece in terms of the, um,
removal of the emissions, uh,
reduction plan, you are correct.
That's not in the, um, letter and we haven't
provided, um, advice.
We've had working level discussions around, uh, uh,
with the ministry, um, during that process.
But ultimately, you know, that's the prerogative
of the government side.
I, but just clarifying that, that idea
or suggestion that it come from the Climate Change
Commission around durable of a
What's come from the Climate Change
Commission is in that letter.
Yep. Yeah.
Brilliant. Thank you very much. Look,
we are gonna take a short break now.
So just we run time to stretch your legs
and then we'll come back for another hour, um, of scrutiny.
So thank you.
Start back in public session
on the Climate Change Commission annual reviews.
And so, uh, we will start
with another primary from Deborah Russell.
Thank you. Um, so another
semi-technical ish one.
Um, well, not really.
You, um, got all your,
you've got a really admirable record in terms
of getting the reports in on time.
Um, so I, I did note that.
And, um, particularly given the, the staffing exchanges
and all the pressures you're under.
So go, you, I think
We're aiming, I think we're aiming
to get one in earns coming,
Probably nerdy swats, but I
Sequence the timing because obviously
that puts quite a lot of stress on if you,
they're all due at once.
Yes, yes. So we we're trying to smooth it out
Even so, but hang on to it.
Um, anyway, but, um, there was one where you ended up,
um, submitting it.
You had an ex the minister extended the due date.
And when I looked at it, it was the, um, emissions
advice on the emissions trading scheme.
And the minister requested a scope change.
Are you able to tell us what that scope change was?
Uh, that, so, um, yes.
The ETS advice doesn't have a statutory, um,
specific date in the legislation.
So it is agreed, um, between, um, the,
essentially what's practical, um,
and just balancing it so that the, um,
the ministry also has time
to do its part in the regulations.
Um, and it that really related to what information,
our information cutoff was, um, uh, taken into account the,
um, second, uh, second emissions reduction plan.
Yeah. Um, so we pushed back the date in order to be able
to take into account the second emissions reduction plan in
the ETS settings Advice. Yep.
Yep. Yeah. Okay. So that, that explains what was going on.
Yeah. Because it was obviously all done
with everyone saying, yes, let's do this.
That's not an issue.
Um, we've just, um, in the, the stuff that the minister
dropped in a PR on Tuesday night,
three weeks ago at eight o'clock in the evening, um, closed,
um, and all, well, all sorts of reasons.
There's stuff in there that, um,
didn't need to be that secret.
Um, but the, uh, one of the things
that the minister has announced will be happening is
that the ETS unit prices
and volumes are going
to be decoupled from the nationally
determined contributions.
Can you unpack what that means a little, that sort
of, it was,
Um, so currently the ETS settings have
to be, um, set in accordance with, um,
the nationally determined contribution, which is, um,
the New Zealand's, uh, Paris commitment essentially.
Mm-hmm. Um, and, uh,
and strictly accord with, um, the 2050 target, I think is,
you know, there's language like that in the legislation.
Um, I believe the government has proposed removing the
accordance with the NDC
and focusing in purely on our, um, domestic, um, response.
Um, so I, I understand that's what's in the proposal,
but of course it would be probably better
to ask the ministry about this.
Right. The proposed changes us,
But you offer advice, don't you, on the ETS settings,
that's an annual mm-hmm.
Thing. Mm-hmm. So how's it gonna gonna affect the advice?
Um, so whenever we do the ETS settings advice as opposed
to wider, um, advice around the, um,
emissions trading scheme, um,
we must take into account what's in legislation, including,
um, accordance with the NDC.
So that will change, um, if the legislation changes.
So if they remove the NDC from the legislation,
we'll no longer do that accordance piece.
Mm-hmm. Yeah. Um, we will the 2050 target.
Yeah, yeah, Yeah.
I can just sort, it's gonna throw
through in effect all sorts
of things in lots of different ways.
'cause it effect, it, um,
takes the ETS away from being an
effective tool in some ways.
Yeah. It's hard to know
until we see what the changes actually are.
Do you have a supplementary on that?
Yeah. Just particularly to dig into, um, that untethering.
So what do you think the ramifications will be both
domestically and internationally with the untethering
of RETS from the NDC?
Uh, well, so the, um,
the ETS is that price signal that sends mm-hmm.
Um, uh, puts price on pollution
and sends it through the economy.
Um, it, um, is currently, um,
uh, when we produce our advice,
what I can say is we have been assuming
that the government will purchase offshore
mitigation mm-hmm.
To, um, make up the shortfall between what we can do
domestically and what our ND C one commitment is.
So that is the, um, uh, piece
that will change going forward.
Um, we will no longer need to make that assumption.
We will be purely looking at what happens domestically.
So if I can just clarify Yes. On that point. Yeah.
'cause you know, my understanding of the untethering is
that it's effectively, for all intents and purposes
and admission, that we are not going
to meet our NDC domestically through the Ts as one
of the major leaders to get there.
Does that accord with your view?
Oh, I think, um, that it is something to ask
that the intention behind this is something
to really ask the minister, not the commission.
And Ryan's still supplementary on that.
Thanks. Forgive me if this is a little naive.
You know, how you've got a, um, so you've got a solar panel
and a residential house, and they supply power
and can put money back into the grid
and actually get money back.
Mm-hmm. We always talk about potentially falling short
and having to pay these huge amounts to overseas to, on
that EDTS, if we've got a shortfall NDC,
what if we've got the what, sorry,
N-D-C-N-D-C,
What if we've got the ability to actually gain credits
and bring and come back because we,
we exceed our expectations.
Why don't we even talk about that?
Um, so there, um, there is a, um,
two hour o overall commitment in Paris.
I'll ju I'll just lay out the context a little bit
and then hone in hopefully on your question.
Um, we have, um, so we have a global commitment
that's in part made up of what we can do domestically.
And, um, it has been the strategy of, um,
previous governments, you know, for a long time, um,
to then make up the shortfall through what's known
as offshore mitigation.
There is a significant gap between what
we can feasibly do, um, at home in the short term
without, um, big economic
and social implications, um, domestically.
So there is quite a gap there. Mm-hmm.
Um, between our domestic, um, our domestic
feasible pathways out to 2030, um,
and what, um, the commitment is, um, internationally,
But up to 2050 isn't their ability to accelerate
through tech, and we could actually exceed our expectations.
Uh, yeah. So when you, you zoom out from
what is the NDC periods when you zoom out
to think about 2050 Absolutely.
And what our, um, uh, emissions, uh,
pathways show is actually acceleration in the 2030s.
Um, and we can get, um, potentially, um, a lot further, um,
than what's possible right now,
But prudent government may recalibrate some
of those adjustments accordingly then. Yeah.
I think the, the, the question comes down to time periods
of these different commitments, essentially.
So what is achievable in the short term? Yeah.
Which is that NDC one, um, what's achievable, um,
and for NDC two, which is 2030 mm-hmm.
To 2035. So there's a, um, more opportunity there
to do more domestically as well.
Yeah. Um, that's what our modeling shown.
And then, um, lots of opportunity out to 2050.
Thank you. There's a couple
of supplementaries on this question line.
So Debra Russell will go to your first Yeah.
So I just, what I was, I was thinking about
you more or less answered it.
So in terms of those further out NDCs, it's things like the,
the solar on roofs
and things like that, which is getting
cheaper and cheaper and cheaper.
Mm-hmm. Um, yeah. And which should be quite useful to us.
Really. Okay. Yeah.
So there, that's kind of quite encouraging in some ways
that in the longer term we can meet those goals.
It's the short term months. That's the Yeah.
Well, what do you, what do you mean
by short term and long term though?
Well, we've took short term, we're talking five years out
to the first NDC 30, we're not gonna meet it.
Yeah. Unless we go for the overseas. Well, we dunno that.
Mm. Just a supplementary from Grant Kellum minister
sign MOUs on it.
So, and this is just a supplementary on this. Yeah.
Um, so you just mentioned there
before that you, you, when you, you advise you, um,
you are conscious of the social upheaval, if we mm-hmm.
Try to achieve these things in two short timeframe,
give us examples of what, what you, what
what you might see if we went down that track.
Yeah, Sure. So, um, this is where it comes back to
that question of pace, right?
Mm-hmm. You don't wanna go so slow, you kick the can down
and you have abrupt, uh, can down the road
and you have abrupt change later.
Um, but if you go really fast, then, um, uh,
your only options really are around shutting down, um,
uh, uh, manufacturing economic opportunity, et cetera.
And this is, comes back to this question, uh, this point
around the time lag between mm-hmm.
Um, acting and putting in place policies
and when you see the, um, results on the ground,
and that, that is an important consideration in emissions
reduction plans that you need
to act earlier from a policy point of view for the, um,
signals to change to the business community for them
to make the plan changes around their, um,
their plants, for example.
So that time lag thing is important, particularly,
So they've got confidence to invest.
Yeah. And, And then the whole, so, but,
but in, in that whole context, as you said, out out
to 2050 mm-hmm.
Is looking encouraging. Right.
Um, in terms of what is technically
and economically achievable, achievable and affordable.
So last year we, we said it was possible
to go further than zero.
Yeah. Thank you. Very good.
And Chloe has a supplementary on
This particular question line.
Yeah. I mean, specifically about the signals
that are being sent to the market, given
that there is such a reliance on,
particularly the ETS under this ERP,
what signal does it send to the market if we are weakening
our climate targets?
Um, yeah.
So as you say, signals to the market are really important.
Mm-hmm. Um, and, uh, what we, um,
have long recommended in our own advice is
to give a well sign signal pathway.
Mm-hmm. A lot of, um, uh, uncertainty about where, um,
the direction of travel is heading, um, means
that the business community holds back from investing, um,
in the opportunities that are out out there.
Mm-hmm. Um, uh,
and so that's where, uh,
our et our broader ETS advice we've, um, come back
and said, actually the E ts is a tool, not a strategy.
Be clear on what you're trying to achieve first,
and then, um, adjust, you know, set the ETS up to deliver
That. But if I can just be
really clear, the halving
of our methane target the decision to do so.
The signal that that sends,
and again, you can talk about it in a hypothetical sense,
if you would prefer to be, continue to be diplomatic,
does the halving of the methane target send a signal
to the agricultural sector
or investors to speed up in that transition or the opposite?
Um, so I think, you know,
the legislation sets out five yearly target reviews mm-hmm.
That can be anticipated, right. That that's clear.
And there is a, um, uh, a process set up around making sure
that those targets are still fit for purpose, um,
as evidence changes.
Mm-hmm. Um, the end goal, if that is changed,
then we'll, um, filter back
and change ambition, you know,
potentially change the ambition.
Yeah. Um, more broadly,
But if I can just ask really clearly, I mean,
you guys recommended tightening
and raising the floor of our methane target.
Instead we have the government doing the opposite
with harboring our methane target.
Mm-hmm. We're talking a lot about the signals
that are being sent to the investment
in business community mm-hmm.
In clear terms that are understandable to the public. Yeah.
Does a weakening
of our methane target send a positive signal
for climate emissions reductions?
Well, so the change in the target, um, is the end goal
that everyone's aiming for.
So if you weaken an end goal that everyone's waking, um, uh,
aiming for, that's gonna flow back into, um,
how much ambition mm-hmm.
Um, the market sees. Correct.
So reduced ambition for the market. Thank you.
Let me from Speak of markets, um, the, um, the,
the example that's been led by a number
of our major exporters in terms
of the signals they're sending to their producers,
like I speak as a fonterra supplier, um, and,
and in, in the sense that they're offering incentives for,
for us to reduce our emissions
and so forth, responding
to a market without the government having to taxes.
Yeah. Doesn't that, uh, look to help achieve
what we wanna achieve in, in the end anyway,
without severe a disruption
to the rural communities of New Zealand. Lemme get
Clarification. Just
won't, we'll get them answer this.
So that, I mean, we we're encouraged by, you know,
the responses and, and,
and, uh, direction
of fonterra that, uh, yeah.
We think, uh, we think broadly business is making a lot of,
um, inroads into the challenges of, um, the reduction
of emissions and, um, you know, which we, we support.
Um, yeah, I guess the, to put a bit more context around
that, um, the, the key thing is, um, there's no guarantee
that those signals will be enough.
Those price signals will be enough.
So that is one thing for government to be aware of.
Um, and also their efficiency, um, intensity, um,
targets not absolute emissions.
So you could have a situation where there's an incentive
to reduce intensity, but you are, um,
but you might have, um, uh, emissions growing overall.
So those are the kinds of things to keep an eye on.
Yeah. But do my clarification. Sure, sure,
Sure. A clarification
from Rachel,
The, the member referred to a tax
and emissions tax, is there an emissions tax?
Uh, no, sorry, I didn't hear that. Sorry.
Do you wanna clarify that? Uh,
No reference branch?
No, it's fine. Just tax. Sorry, my, my, my, my,
my that wording wrong.
Um, so yeah, just,
but just you, you, you're going, um, if the, in terms
of missions and testing, obviously it's one
of the key things we need to be conscious of.
And I talked raised earlier about emissions leakage mm-hmm.
In terms of the, the global situation.
Food production one's conscious
of producing enough food around the world.
Yeah. And actually, if you're producing, um, uh, more food
with the same, or with the same
or a lower percentage emissions in, uh, per, per unit
of per unit of nutrition, isn't that going
to help the overall emissions of the world?
And, and the overall, uh, well, um, even the overall targets
of the world, given we can do
it more efficiently than most others.
Yeah. So, um, food, uh, you know, demand
for food increases globally.
Um, producing that at the, um, lowest emissions footprint po
possible is really important.
Um, the, uh, the, um, we've all got
That's so interesting.
Carry, we need to be very conscious of emissions leakage.
We have the, um, for example,
in the emissions trading scheme,
we have industrial allocations for that, that point point.
I think the key point I was trying to make
before was to hit
what is are our targets within the legislation.
Um, they are absolute targets.
Um, and so intensity target, uh,
intensity incentives coming in from offshore won't
necessarily meet the government's targets in the
legislation, just
because they're two, they're a bit apples and oranges.
Uh, we've got a whole lot of supplementaries on this.
Uh, I'll go to Deborah Russell
First. Yeah. Look, I,
I am interested in the food
intensity, um, argument.
And I've seen it linked to methane production in a paper
looking at Ireland, where, um, the finding was
ultimately that Ireland, like New Zealand sells
its food to rich countries.
Um, so everyone reads Yeah, I know.
But the interesting thing there is that the countries
where people have set choices about their food, um,
and they choose sustainable products.
So, um, as a flow, that's why I choose ours onto the,
our trade agreements, which will specify
agreement with our Paris goals.
So it's probably just a point of clarification there too,
that food intensity is not gonna save us from
needing to meet our Paris goals. Okay.
So was that a question or a, a lecture? A statement's.
A okay. It was a statement.
So that's your supplementary Francisco.
Have you got a supplementary on the specific
Question line? Yeah, yeah, yeah.
It's a lecture. Can
I check? Um,
one of the kind of, um, items
with the discussion has been around, um, the idea of, um,
emissions leakage, particularly around anything.
Mm-hmm. And one of the first things that the, um,
that the interim climate change, uh, commission did was to,
um, look at the context of, um, emissions leakage.
And, uh, in that you said the risk
of leakage does not appear high enough
to provide a convincing argument for New Zealand not
to implement policies to reduce its own emissions.
That was a while ago. I recognize.
Has the advice changed since then?
Um, yeah. So if I can refer to that piece of advice,
it was a specific piece of advice, um, related to, um, uh,
the, um, response in agriculture,
I think it was back in 2022.
Yeah. Um, we commissioned a piece of work looking at the,
um, the potential for emissions leakage at
that point in time for current center settings.
And so I think that's where, um,
you are pulling that piece there.
Um, the, we haven't, um, done that piece
of work again, specifically, um, looking at the progress
of the agriculture sector in terms of its emissions,
but more broadly, um, the global picture is changing.
We, we still need to take into consideration the potential
for, um, emissions leakage when we give our, um,
our emissions budget advice.
Um, there is, it's not just risk,
there is opportunity here as well.
And that is a, a key thing that we've, uh,
talked about in our latest monitoring report, um, with our,
uh, export partners, um, increasingly, um, looking
for low emissions, uh, products, um,
that there's an opportunity for us to, um,
take advantage of that into the future.
Yeah. Yeah. Thank you.
And Simon Court also has a supplementary on this issue.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, so
you were discussing emissions intensity production, um,
and that, uh, you, you noted
that New Zealand has an absolute target in terms
of its emission reduction.
Mm-hmm. Uh, you know, 50%, uh, by 2030 compared
to 2005 levels for CO2, I think that's, I got that right.
Is it 50% by 2030?
Uh, so our, that's, Is that an NDC?
The NDC, so you're talking about the NDC rather than
the, that act. Yeah.
Yeah. So we've got these absolute targets,
and yet if New Zealand is succeeding on an emissions
intensity basis, but, you know, we aim
to deliver on government policy to actually, uh,
increase the value and amount of coming production
that we export, um, isn't it likely that, you know,
in absolute terms, our emissions may in fact increase.
You know, if we manufacture more things
and sell 'em to the world, uh,
and our carbon, uh, as a result, you, our,
our overall carbon emissions go up, even though we might be,
uh, at a lower intensity per unit production.
Aren't we just really like shooting ourselves in the foot
with this absolute target?
So I think the really important thing to realize here is
that, um, that this is a changing, um, playing field.
Um, so while we are one of the lowest, um,
emitting agricultural sectors in the world, we know that
our, um, uh, our competitors are moving fast.
We have these, um, technologies available being rolled out
in Europe currently that will, um,
reduce meth sanctions by 30%.
Um, and so, uh, we need to be thinking about where we want,
well this is for the government relic.
We, we want the, um, uh, our competitive advantage
to come from long term in a world that's increasingly moving
to low emissions products.
So would it be helpful then in that case
to actually be starting
to think about an emissions intensity target, if that's
what our competitors are saying, uh,
looking at rather than a gross
or an absolute target, which is
what we've signed up to, to Paris?
I mean, should we reconsider our Paris commitment?
So ultimately living, uh,
limiting warming relies on absolute emissions, um,
to be reduced.
Mm-hmm. So while intensity is an, an element to look at, um,
especially if you're a company, you're not responsible
for a country, um, at that Paris agreement level,
at the country level, we look at absolute emissions
because ultimately that is what is going to, um,
limit warming sounds
Like cold or poorer lives.
Sorry. Yeah. Okay. That was just a statement there.
I think, uh, Chloe has got a supplementary Yeah.
Um, given that we're talking about farmers
and efficiency of food production in particular, um,
I just first for sake of the committee
and the partisan attacks,
I can foresee coming out this question, want
to say we all back the farmers,
we all want the farmers to succeed.
But just to come back down to some objective facts,
I understand that even Fonterra
and their 2024, um, report that they reported
that emissions from New Zealand dairy farms were 20% higher
per kilo of milk than even Australian counterparts.
So I guess, could you benchmark us in terms
of the efficiency of our agricultural sector against
comparable jurisdictions?
And I guess just again, to unpack this point
around the signals that we are sending to the market that
Yeah, I guess just wanna underscore the fact
that it is entirely feasible
and there are huge opportunities for supporting
that transition to lower emissions intensity.
Yep. Um, so I know, I'm aware we are one of the lowest,
but not necessarily the lowest.
I haven't got exact, um, benchmarking to hand,
but um, you know, we could potentially
provide some follow up on that.
Mm. Um, in terms of policy signals that, um, you know,
they are really important in terms of, um, where, um,
companies in our economy invests into the
Future and just further to the point on carbon leakage.
Mm-hmm. Um, because that has been a topic
that's come up a heck of a lot here.
Obviously you've unpacked for the committee's, um,
interest the point around, uh, free allocation
or industrial allocation mm-hmm.
Um, have you guys engaged in providing any form of,
of advice or being asked about carbon water adjustments
and how that could potentially factor in if we're talking
about trading partners and again, dealing
with this emissions leakage concern?
Surely that makes sense. Yeah.
Especially given where the EU is moving. Yeah.
So we have covered, um, the potential around, uh,
carbon border adjustment mechanisms.
Mm-hmm. And some of our, um, previous advice,
particularly looking, um, I,
and I think we actually gave a, um, presentation
to this committee.
That's right. Um, uh, that covered some of those aspects.
Mm-hmm. Um, the world is moving in terms of, uh,
its response to, uh, you know,
pricing carbon more generally.
Um, and so it may well be that, um, we will need, need
to transition our response
to managing that emissions leakage.
Mm-hmm. And carbon by, uh, border adjustment mechanisms.
We do that, uh, potentially way to do that. Um,
And just while we're on agriculture,
'cause I'm quite interested in this area, um,
and um, you talk about the fact, uh, that New Zealand,
we do have very carbon efficient farmers.
Mm-hmm. Um, comparatively to the rest of the world,
would you say that we have some
of the most carbon efficient farmers in the world?
Well, we've got a bell curve,
and so we have got some farmers who are incredibly, um,
um, advanced and efficient.
Mm-hmm. And then we've got that, um, you know, uh,
big majority in the middle and
then we've got a tail. Right.
Clarification, Just for your question, madam Chair
as well, are you talking about carbon or
Methane or carbon gases?
Carbon just carbon, yeah. Yeah.
Carbon rather than methane. Yes.
Oh, for agriculture, that's a very fit
for ag. Yes. For ag.
Okay. Okay.
So I, um, when you, uh,
so I had been answering apologies on an assumption
around methane rather than around carbon.
Yes, yes. And, um, of course there is different, um,
energy use mm-hmm.
Um, footprints depending on the different types of,
um, farming production.
So, um, uh, feed lots, for example. Yes.
Use a lot more, um, energy compared to us overall.
I think, you know, um, uh, that broader, um, measurement,
uh, we are one of the lowest emission,
um, production systems.
Um, but again, that's the current status,
Not, and obviously you take this into all your measurables
when you are looking at that,
and obviously the different types of, um, farming, you know,
whether obviously it be dairy,
whether it be sheep and beef mm-hmm.
Or whether it be arable horticulture, proven as Yeah,
well, horticulture as well.
I mean, those are all relevant obviously to,
um, capturing that data.
Yeah, absolutely. And I think there is also a, um,
you know, we've identified the opportunity around, um, uh,
electrification on farm mm-hmm.
And, and solar and batteries on farm, um, to, um,
help support the local grid
and to reduce, um, uh, um, diesel emissions on farm as well.
So there is a lot opportunity down that energy side. Mm.
And 'cause just, and just on that,
because you did mention it before around the technologies
and the innovation that we're obviously
seeing around the world.
Mm-hmm. Um, and obviously New Zealand are starting
to pick up on some of those opportunities
as we've mentioned, and the technologies innovation.
How fast do you feel that we are going?
Um, I, uh, so from my understanding, you know,
we've got a, a, um, a good pipe, a pipeline,
um, in development.
The key point will be making sure
that it can be deployed on farm.
Um, and our farms are complex systems, as you know,
so not necessarily every tool will work on every farm.
It's really about, um, uh, making sure that, um,
farmers are enabled to work
with the tools that work for their farm.
Mm-hmm. Um, so we've got some specifics around that.
And then monitoring report from this year.
Thank you Grant going
And just follow up. So
when you look at, like, in terms of technologies,
a classic example of getting more from the
Sameer ground mm-hmm.
More efficient production is the Holter
grazing systems mm-hmm.
That have come out. Mm-hmm. Yeah. Right.
So for example, I mean, that just shows of the example
of the technological improvements
and then that was a
statement as much as anything, I suppose.
But the question I have is around,
oh my gosh, that's incredible.
Um, the, the other one in terms of industrial location,
something that I've, I've visited the plant twice as part
of my north northern region is Golden basin cement plant,
which I know you, you, Cameron,
I think you come discuss with us.
Yeah. That's the indu.
'cause you know, they, they obviously have those challenges.
Yes. Um, and, and it's interesting
'cause one of the things they do do also is they, um, it,
as part of the create the cement,
they take about a hundred thousand tons of rubbish mm-hmm.
From waste from Auckland. Yeah.
Um, which is, it's all part of that whole picture.
Do you take those sorts of things into account?
Yeah. Times. Yeah, we do. And I think,
I believe though one of the lo I mean, I think
that the lowest, um,
footprint cement available in the country, they, you know,
they've done, uh, um,
Huge amount. Yeah. If they didn't
have industrial allocations,
chances are they'd be outta business.
Yeah. Well, I think with there's a particular, um, uh,
situation that Golden Bay cement, um, faces, um, in terms
of actually, um, imported alternatives who don't face.
Correct. That's, that's the point. Yeah. Yeah.
Thank you. Thank you. And now we'll go to Chloe.
So one last little step, I'm sorry. Yeah.
Uh, back on your assessment of the government strategy
and the impacts of it, I just wanna quote here, um,
which may be useful to grant the column, uh, that I quote,
the reliance on forest for a large proportion
of emissions reduction is likely
to increase the long-term cost of meeting the 2050 target
and increase impacts on future generations.
Could you unpack for us in language that is accessible
to regular New Zealanders,
what it is that you are saying there?
When you are talking about how the government strategy has a
reliance on forest for a large proportion
of emissions reduction mm-hmm.
And that this is going to increase the long-term cost
of meeting the 2050 target
and increase impacts on 50 generations.
Um, so what we are talking about in that piece,
there is a scenario where, um, there is
a large amount of forestry mm-hmm.
And as a result, you know, to meet our target.
And so as a result, we don't get as much, um,
decarbonization in the economy.
Um, when you don't get
as much decarbonization in the con economy.
What we're talking about is electrification of industry,
for example, and there, so you are, um,
missing out on those economic benefits
of, um, reduced costs.
Yeah. And I guess further to that point then, that's kind
of part of what you're talking about when you identified
significant risks with the government meeting it's ERP two.
Um, so with, uh, the, uh, adjacent
to that, it's not quite that, um,
when we're talking about the significant risks
for meeting e RRP two mm-hmm.
What we're talking about is really a scenario
where you put all your eggs in one basket mm-hmm.
Or a significant number of eggs in one basket. Mm-hmm.
Um, so if you are look, looking to meet, um, almost half of,
um, the budget out of forestry mm-hmm.
There's a couple of things that can, um,
implications of that.
Um, first implication is you need those forests
in the ground quickly mm-hmm.
For that carbon to then start sequestering.
But the other is risks around, um, things like fires
and storms, um, you know,
another cyclone Gabriel taking a big hit mm-hmm.
Out of that forestry, then you'll be faced
with a difficult situation where you might not be able
to meet the, um, budget. Mm-hmm.
Or for example, an ERP that relies on fully a third
of reduction coming from carbon capture technology,
which the industry themselves is saying
is economically unfeasible.
Uh, or a third of it coming from waste minimization,
where based on our analysis,
the government's double counting funding or otherwise.
I guess this kind of comes back to
like when you are talking about the significant risks
and the need to act early mm-hmm.
Um, I dunno how to frame this in a way
that you can diplomatically answer given,
but you know, we are seeing the emergence of exactly
what it is that you were concerned about
and have floated being concerned about in your multiple
reports over the past year or so.
Um, what does that mean in terms
of the potential cumulative impacts
of more emissions being allowed into the atmosphere
and, you know, potentially waiting to
or hoping to rely on offsets,
particularly forestry offsets in the future? That's
A long question.
Yeah. So I think, um, what, what,
what a key message of, um, our monitoring report is that,
um, be aware of the time lags.
So the earlier, um, you act, um,
the more options you have available
for meeting those future targets, and that's really, and,
and those future emissions budgets.
So I think that's really, when we think about
that cumulative, um, effect of, um,
uh, action.
Mm-hmm. Um, we are really thinking about that, um, time lag.
Mm-hmm. I, I mean, when we,
when we are looking at the cumulative effect on
the atmosphere, of course we've got set emissions budgets.
So we've already decided domestically what is, um,
the country is aiming for over the next 15 years mm-hmm.
Um, in terms of our impact on, um, emissions. Mm-hmm.
So, uh, if we are going to meet, you know, that is the piece
that, um, we need to be making sure that we can meet.
Um, and, um, you know, with all good planning,
you wanna build in a buffer mm-hmm.
And, and make sure you are,
um, you haven't got too many risks.
To that point, does ERP two represent that early action
that you're saying is necessary?
Uh, well, ERP two was what we were assessing,
and that's where we found, um, significant and the er yeah.
Some significant risk in EB two
and insufficient for EB three.
Thank you. Thank, thank you.
Look, um, you've got stop on that. Okay. You've gotta stop.
Sorry. Rachel, Rachel, Rachel, Rachel,
I reckon start should keep
talking. Yeah. And
Much encouragement. And,
and this is related to your commentary on the ERP too
and all the eggs being in one basket,
and Chloe half asked this question.
Mm-hmm. Um, so apologies for repetition, but it,
but eggs in basket, so
that is relying on carbon capture Yeah.
On forestry, on the ETS
and some other factors without,
in a significantly reduced range
of other things across all of the economy.
Is that a correct
Statement to make
or can you Yeah, when I'm talk, when I was referring
to exit at the eggs in one basket, sorry for the
metaphor there, um, really, um, you know, that is, um,
relation to your strategy for getting
to the third emissions budget period.
What we found is that there was significant reliance on,
um, two factors.
One is the forestry
and the other is the ETS, um,
to drive sufficient change across our industry.
Yeah.
So, so everyone seems to think
that the only way we're gonna get out of this is
by pun pine trees.
Right? Well, actually it's literally
plan based on, based on what you've been saying.
No,
Don't put words.
You have assumed. Okay. Maybe rephrase, just rephrase.
You've rephrase the state.
You've assumed that pine trees, it's about native,
there's also things called natives mm-hmm.
Which can be planted and utilized Indigenous indi Yeah.
Forestry. And when,
and you also, when you look at the whole
economy as a whole Yeah.
The, the use of biofuels going forward to replace the coal,
particularly the coal fire plants in, in the, in the,
in the south island in the particular,
'cause there's not gas down there at the moment at all.
And then, but the other one of course is the whole
electrification process.
Yep. Right. If, if those things all flow through,
then do you take account of all those opportunities
or are you just basing it on
what you see right here and now?
Uh, we do take account of those opportunities.
So in our monitoring advice, we, uh, you know, assess, um,
the, um, risks
around achieving future budgets
based on the government's plan.
And we also are required to give, um, uh,
highlight opportunities to go further.
Um, and, um,
there are plenty across the economy should do more.
Um, so, uh, there all of those, you know,
there's a lot more than just pine trees, um, that will help,
that can help us get to the
Targets. Just supplementary
on that, because we have spoken about
renewable energy and, and Ryan mentioned it earlier
and how obviously important that is to mm-hmm.
Uh, reducing our emissions
and I suppose the consenting regime
around those renewable energy projects, whether it be solar,
um, wind or hydro, you know, uh,
obviously has been taking a very, very long time.
Yeah. Do you factor in the fact that, you know,
we could be getting these projects consented faster
and bringing on the renewable energy faster, which would add
to the planning and, and your modeling around that? Yeah.
Um, yes. So we, we did, um, consider that that, um, uh,
consenting or planning timeframes are a constraint,
and that's a barrier to, um, help pick up,
uh, pick up speed.
Um, it's an issue globally, you know, um,
everyone is struggling with the, actually the rate of change
that we need for the electrification, um,
to meet global targets,
but also, um, that advantage, um, from
that low cost electricity system.
So in general, um, smoothing out those kind of barriers.
Um, there's a, you know, broad number of things that, um,
where there is potential for policy to help, um,
support more change.
Absolutely. And Rachel, you
Ary? Yes. And
whilst I've got a lot
to say about that particular issue
That Be a new, that we repealed the RMA
and national brought it back.
I will not go into that too much.
Um, going back to the point that, um,
the member Northland was making, um, we, it's a question
with a lot of use in it.
I was just checking the statements that you, Joe,
we are making about, uh, the reliance on the ETS
and pine trees Yes.
Was in regard to the current government's
emissions reduction plan.
Correct. Relying on those two factors. Yes.
And that you, you, Joe
and the Climate Commission have advised that that seems
to be risky and too narrow.
Yes. Yes. Thank you. Thank you. Uh,
Look, we've go to Deborah Russell now for a question.
Very last thing I wanna ask,
and it's quite, um, quite different.
So as one that sits
and reads Paris Agreement, if this one does, you know
what you're talking about, do it on the plane.
Um, there's article 12, which is, um,
a very similar little article.
It says, parties shall cooperate
and taking measures as appropriate
to enhance climate change education, training,
public awareness, public participation,
and public access to information, recognizing the importance
of these steps with respect
to enhancing actions under this agreement.
So it's essentially, you know,
parties better engage in some education and training.
Um, and I've, I've, I've looked for that across government.
Is that happening within the climate commission?
Uh, in term, uh, so that's, do we have an education role?
Yeah. Is that essentially Yeah.
Um, the commission doesn't have an explicit education role.
Yeah. Um, so we, um, uh, we try and, um,
and we're working increasingly
to make our advice more accessible Yeah.
Um, and help lay the foundations of understanding so that,
um, people can make well-informed decisions.
But, um, we, we are not, um, funded for it, funded
for providing education. Yeah. Are you really
Are, but we are concerned to make sure
that the reports are understandable.
Yeah. Uh, you know, uh, are written in, in,
in plain English as it were.
But we, we, we've got a range of Yeah.
Audiences in that sense. And of course,
a primary one is government,
and we have detailed information
and evidence on which to base it, but
nonetheless, we are trying to improve that
and making everything publicly available
and then providing webinars. And so
It's hard.
It is. We, Sorry, I just recall from trying
to teach tax, do doing anything,
Trying find Anything technical is actually hard.
Um, so yeah. So are, um, uh, are you
of anyone across government who's tasked with the,
that Article 12 education rule?
Oh, I couldn't say specifically about the art article,
article 12 education rule.
I think that would be, um, something
to ask the environment. Yeah. I'll,
I don't think it's happening anywhere, but I thought I'd
just check and it's sort of, but is it, is it,
is it the sort of thing that could fit within your remit?
Were you funded for it? Yeah.
Yeah. Thank you. Thank You. And now we'll go to Chloe.
Back to the ETS. Uh, so
what would the commission's view be on the impact
of carbon price currently being lower than $40 and the long
and short term on government's ability
to meet its emissions reduction plan?
Yeah, so, um, first my caveat, the commission doesn't, um,
have a view about carbon prices necessarily,
and it's market sets them.
Yeah. Um, but we do, um, know that,
um, to drive the, um, kinds of, um,
cha decarbonization that we need, um,
that you're looking at, um, marginal abatement costs hitting
around the a hundred dollars and above.
Mm-hmm. Um, now that's not necessarily,
doesn't necessarily have to be driven by our carbon prices,
that it can be driven by other types of po uh, uh,
po policies as well. Um,
If there were any Yeah.
Um, but, um, you know, uh, we do know that we, um,
that, uh, I think I'm just gonna repeat it.
Yeah.
Kidding, Kidding. Yes. Sorry. Yeah.
I mean, further to that point then,
will you guys do any modeling?
Will you need to alter your modeling scenarios in light
of the dramatic falling off the cliff of the ETS price?
So that's gonna be a factor that's, um, uh, very relevant
to our, um, emissions monitoring report next year. Mm-hmm.
But I guess to your point earlier around the lag mm-hmm.
Uh, and also the cumulative effects Yeah. Both economically.
Yeah. But also in terms terms of climate changing emissions.
Um, I mean, surely you have a few now,
at least hypothetically, if we were
to talk about the crashing of the ETS market, what does
that tend to imply the ramifications will be in terms
of ERP two?
Um, so we are really careful not to speculate in
between those monitoring, um, reports, um,
because we wanna make sure that we are a thorough job.
Um, but, you know, the,
the key thing is it is really clear the kind of that level
of emission, uh, uh, the marginal abatement costs
that we need to get that, um, change in,
um, industry and energy.
Okay. Thank you.
And now Grant, you've got a supplementary on that
Primary, I suppose might say.
Um, so do, does the commission have a view
or ha has it given any consideration to the calls of some,
um, some people who think we should pull out
of the Paris Accord?
Well, but that's part
of our statutory mandate
is based on the Paris agree. Mm-hmm.
Agree. And so do you have view on that? It's
In the statute, so that is what we, uh, report against.
Yeah. And It's not our place to have a view
beyond. Okay. Thank you. Yeah.
Uh, Francisco, Uh, thank you Chair.
Um, uh, I have a question
to the chair of the Climate Commission.
Thank you for taking on the role. Mm-hmm.
Um, in one of the first interviews that you did when you,
um, first came on the role, um, you were asked whether, uh,
you saw climate change as the biggest threat
to life on the planet.
Uh, at that time. You said you,
you did know if you could make that assertion,
but having been in the role for a few months now,
what's your view
Now? I do believe
it's an existential threat.
Oh. But not the biggest threat.
Well, I don't know if I have done that detailed analysis.
There are lots of threats, of course,
but it is, you know, that's why I took it on.
It's something I, I'm deeply concerned about and, and, uh,
and to see it as an existential threat.
Mm. Chloe, yeah. I can keep going.
So I just wanna clarify, um, the implications
of the government removing the requirement for ERPs
to include the following, uh, from section
five ZG 3D,
and I quote, a strategy to mitigate the impacts
that reducing emissions
and increasing removals will have on, uh, employees
and employers regions, iwi and Maori
and wider communities, including funding
for any mitigation action.
I mean, does this mean that analysis
of emissions reductions on just transition
and low income communities
and regions, particularly those that are impacted
by the transition won't continue?
Um, we, again, I can't speculate on the exact changes
that are gonna end up.
Um, our advice is, uh, um,
predicated on those considerations that we
Have to, That are set out in the act,
so they're important, um, in dictating
what we think about whether that impacts on, um,
regionally intergenerationally, um, on, um,
different businesses, et cetera.
Um, there are a couple of places in the act we've got five
in, which is our general, um, considerations.
And I believe that, um,
equity is a consideration in those five M.
And then there's specific, um, considerations
for the different, uh, roles.
The five Z I'm not, uh, I can't off the top
of my head, remember the five Z one? Yeah.
Okay. Keep going. You can keep going.
We haven't met time, so you go for it. Chloe. Uh, yeah.
In your annual review, uh, you say,
and I quote, the commission has had to respond
to new financial pressures over the last fiscal year,
including a significant reduction in baseline funding.
Mm-hmm. And in response, uh, your responses
to pre-hearing questions show
that your staff obviously being slashed by 20%.
Uh, what key roles and functions have been cut?
Could you articulate that for the committee?
Um, so we have, um, our continue to produce all of our,
um, requirements under the legislation.
Really where we're at is we have limited, um,
uh, resilience internally.
Um, and so our biggest issue to ma manage is retaining
that core capability.
We need to be able to produce, um, the different pieces
of advice and monitoring.
Uh, and I think this partially goes to, um,
grant's question before, when he was alluding
to hypothetical mythical taxes, uh,
but there was a $3 million per annum, uh,
to support a possible new advisory function on agricultural
emissions, uh, pricing program.
Mm-hmm. Um, that obviously was cut, uh,
and returned to budget, uh, 2024.
How had you started at all on that,
and what was the scoping of that look like?
What would that have been able to potentially show us?
Um, so we had begun preparatory work
for a potential function around, um, uh, methane, um,
pricing and a role that the commission might have had,
but that was very, so, um,
that was very early days. Yeah. Okay.
Yeah. Um, Francisco, you've got a question.
Um, one of the reasons you suggested
that the government tighten, um, its targets was
because of method, uh, sorry, methodological changes that,
um, that were going to occur.
Yes. Um, naturally, could you talk through, I guess,
in plain English, what does Methodo methodological
changes were and what the implications of that were
and why that means the government should
tighten budgets potentially?
Yeah, sure. Um, so
what those methodological changes really related
to the measurements, um, of emissions, um,
and what had happened, there were improvements to the way
that, um, new Zealand's emissions are measured.
Um, the reason we recommended, uh, um, making adjustments
to account for them was
because the emissions budgets were set, um,
using the old approach.
Um, and, um, since then we had a new approach.
So it was really, um, to make sure that, um,
ambition lined up what was with what was originally, um,
intended, uh,
rather than us meeting our targets just based
on a measurement change.
Right. So the implication of
not adjusting the target would be basically just counting,
um, things that actually aren't real
because it's just as a result of a statistical, um, change.
It's a statistical change, I would say.
Right. So it's not an increase in ambition then. It's
Just Yeah. And I wouldn't say
it's things that aren't real.
It's a apples and orange situation.
Yeah. But it's not from government action per se,
it's from changing deals. Yes.
Correct. Just, um, I've got a question actually.
Um, just when you do your modeling
and you're taking into account every single part of the,
uh, I suppose, emissions profile mm-hmm.
Um, do you, uh, do you think that there are,
are areas potentially
that you may have overlooked when you are looking at the
potential areas where you could be sequestering carbon
or, you know, we could be lowering our emissions?
Or there's areas potentially
that you could be looking at further,
Um, where we might have overlooked
or whether we we could go further? Or
Both? So, both. Yeah.
So, so, so areas potentially
where you may have overlooked
or potentially areas where you could be looking into more?
Yeah. Well, I think the evidence,
the evidence is constantly changing.
Mm-hmm. Um, about, uh, you know, we are seeing technologies
coming emerging.
Mm-hmm. Um, we are seeing, uh,
prices go down, um, over time.
So, um, there opportunities do develop, um,
in terms of, um, have we missed anything?
I think that's one of the, the reasons why we do a really
broad range of not just assessment of, um,
what's in the literature, um, engaging, um,
with experts globally,
but also engaging, um, with, um, different sectors, um,
and communities and regions, um, to test
our thinking along the way to make sure that, um, uh, we've,
you know, picked up, um, our evidence and assumptions, um,
and what's on the table, uh, practical on the ground.
Um, and we, um, also get our work peer reviewed, so again,
as a quality assurance, um, for
that, around that kind of risk.
And, and do you think that the Climate change commission
is getting out enough?
Like, and understanding, you know, I suppose the,
the agriculture sector, the energy sector,
and um, you know, to your point, I suppose, making sure
that, um, the reporting is as robust
as it potentially could be
and keeping up as with pace as you've,
as you've rightly pointed out.
Yeah. Yep. Um, so that has been a strong part of the, um,
commission's approach since establishment is, you know,
wide engagement with people on the
ground, um, to test our work,
You know, there are opportunities for us to do more,
but that would need more investment.
Yeah. So this is come, coming down
to the constrained environment, we have to be, you know,
lean and mean and focus very Okay.
Specifically on meeting our, our statutory
Objectives. Yeah.
Okay. And so Simon's got a supple on that. Yeah.
Just in terms of the modeling, um, is, is the modeling
prediction or is it like a series of assumptions
that affects then why then
something will happen or that happen?
Um, so when you talk about the commissions modeling,
what we do is scenario modeling, which means
that it isn't a prediction of
what the future is going to be.
Rather it is, um, showing the implications
of different choices
or the implications of different factors occurring.
Yeah. Whereas when you talk about the government's
projections, that is then, um, in that realm of what, uh,
what are, what's our, um, emissions, um,
track going to look like.
Okay. So thinking about how the model is used
or how the commissions model is used, if it's not,
it's not predictive.
Um, what do you think, uh, businesses, for example,
can take away from the commission's work
and actually apply to choices
that they might make without different technologies
or diff different choices they might make
to investing in plant and equipment?
Um, so, uh, the scenario modeling helps, um,
not just government see the implications of different, um,
choices and, and possibilities,
but actually, um, you know, business, um, we do know that,
um, business are using our scenario modeling to help
with their planning, help with their approach
to risk management
and also, um, thinking more broadly
around portfolio alignment.
So it's really about risk management,
but also about, um, potential opportunities.
Yeah. So, um, so Madam Chair, you
Yes. Carry on.
Um, so, so have you engaged with businesses, uh,
who, who are giving you feedback about
how they're using the model?
Is that, is that how Yes. Is that what you,
So in terms of using our output, um, yeah.
Um, we've, we've engaged for a long time
with a range of different businesses. Yeah.
Okay. Oh, well that's really interesting.
Thank, thank you. Just a
Couple of steps on That still. So
we'll go Chloe and then Grant. Yeah.
It was actually on your first question,
which I feel we've deviated from quite substantially now.
But, um, you'll be aware, the COP 30 text
for the first time references trade explicitly.
Uh, I mean, you were talking about CBAM before,
and I'm aware the Climate Change Committee, which
of course you guys are modeled on from the uk, has
provided quite a number of pieces of advice on trade
and particularly bans as well.
Um, I mean, is this an area that you think would make sense
to be added to the things
that you are providing advice on if you're talking about
those full economic impacts?
Um, so I mean, we do as, as, um, you touch on,
we touch on it, yeah.
Because we, we are thinking about the economic implications
for New Zealand and we're also thinking about more broadly
how other people are responding.
Mm-hmm. So, um, I think there, you know, that's an area
that we are in, um, increasingly, um, planning to, um,
produce more evidence on.
Mm-hmm. Um, to help, um, uh, demonstrate
what the risks and implications are. Mm.
Interesting. Um, grant, yeah, just sort of, um,
supple, it's another general
Question. The, um,
in terms of needing, uh,
and going forward rely, um,
a greater reliance on renewables, batteries
and all that sort of thing to help, you know,
re electrify our economy, how important is a, uh,
a good mining sector to the whole process now mine, the,
the appropriate minerals for the sec for, um,
so we can actually achieve these
Things? Do you mean in New Zealand
or just more generally?
Well, yes, absolutely. If, if,
if the minerals exist here. Absolutely.
Um, so I mean, when we talk about our,
um, uptake of technology mm-hmm.
In New Zealand where, um, importing it, um, from offshore,
um, that will be relying on, um, you know, global supplies.
Um, there, you know, there are particular, um,
like re earth, um, minerals, et cetera, um,
that are required for those production.
Um, we haven't specifically looked at, uh,
anything in detail around the, um, mining in New Zealand in
that context, but I mean, that is a,
there is a global demand for it.
But yeah, there's a quick supple on that if I may.
Just so in terms of doing our bit
for the whole climate change, you know, challenge, uh,
be able to, if we've got some
of those appropriate minerals here would make sense
to actually take advantage of that and, and mine them.
There's potentially economic opportunity there. Thank,
Thank you. And
Francesco, and then we'll go to Chloe. Thank
You. I've got example
from, um, Chloe's previous question,
but I didn't ask it.
Um, you, I was really interested in when you said
that you were planning to provide some more, uh, advice
around trade and cban mechanisms,
is there anything explicitly planned
or were you thinking
that there might be potential to do some stuff?
Yeah, so we are potentially, um, thinking about how we,
um, build our evidence base in that area
and make, um, more quantifiable, um, the, um,
risks and opportunities around trade.
So at the moment in our advice,
we're relying on qualitative EV evidence.
Um, but, uh, qu i, quantitative evidence would be, um,
something that we're aiming to, um, in the next year or two.
Is that something that the minister could explicitly ask
you for advice for under section 5K there?
Well, the minister's allowed to explicitly ask us,
We'll take one last question from Chloe.
Yeah. I'm just concerned off the back of grants
for last question that we very much could see a headline
which says Climate Change Commission says
there's economic opportunities in mining.
So just to provide, uh, an opportunity to actually unpack
that on the transcript.
And I'd make the points that, uh,
if the member is interested
as the International Energy Agency back in 2022 did a piece
of work which showed that we would need six times
as many rare earth minerals,
but that was predicated on non new fossil fuels as at 2022.
That is three years ago.
So I guess just can the commission please be clear mm-hmm.
About your position on mining?
Uh, well, the commission doesn't have a position on mine.
Thank you. Yeah. Okay.
So on that note, uh, we'll wrap it up.
Uh, we thank you very much for your time today,
all your insights and analysis.
Thank you. Thank you.